---
layout: product
title: MrsWatson
---

MrsWatson
=========

MrsWatson is a command-line audio plugin host. It takes one or more plugins,
sends an audio signal to them for processing, and saves the resulting output.
Although the plugins think they are running in realtime, processing is
actually done offline (this is not the same as the "offline" processing in VST
terminology). This makes MrsWatson ideal for developing or debugging plugins,
or processing audio on a server.

History
-------

MrsWatson takes its name from a prior product from [Teragon Audio][1] called
*MissWatson* (and the original name there, in case you were wondering, is a
bit of a joke on the [Dr. Watson][2] utility).

In 2009 I sold the exclusive rights to MissWatson to a company interested in
using it for server-side audio processing. As per the terms of our agreement,
I made one last public release, and removed the code from my website. Since
then, I have received numerous emails and inquiries regarding the project,
mostly from plugin developers or people interested in VST technology. Though I
have no regrets about discontinuing the original MissWatson (particularly
since I didn't have time to properly maintain it), I felt that it was a useful
utility which should be made available and open-sourced.

In 2011, my NDA with the aforementioned company expired, and I started working
on a new MissWatson. MrsWatson is the result of this labor.

As I no longer have the source code for MissWatson, MrsWatson is a black-box
implementation. They share only the name and concept in common. The two
programs are **incompatible** and have **fundamentally different behavior**.
They are also written in different languages (the original in C++, MrsWatson
in C), and have completely different internal architecture.

If you have built some system which used the original MissWatson, then you
will likely have to make some big changes to migrate to MrsWatson. Likewise,
if you were using some of the original MissWatson code in your project, you
will *not* be able to replace it with MrsWatson without significant work on
your end.

Examples
--------

Say you have an audio file which you would like processed through a group of
mastering plugins.

    mrswatson --input mysong.pcm --output out.pcm --plugin plugin1,plugin2

This will print the following output:

    - 000000 Plugin 'plugin1' is of type VST2.x
    - 000000 Plugin 'plugin2' is of type VST2.x
    - 000000 MrsWatson version 0.1.0 initialized
    - 000000 Opening VST2.x plugin 'plugin1'
    - 000029 Opening VST2.x plugin 'plugin2'
    - 000144 Processing with samplerate 44100, blocksize 512, 2 channels
    - 000204 Total processing time 60ms, approximate breakdown by component:
    - 000204   plugin1: 38ms
    - 000204   plugin2: 11ms
    - 000204   MrsWatson: 11ms
    - 000204 Read 3528000 frames from mysong.pcm, wrote 3532800 frames to out.pcm
    - 000204 Shutting down
    - 000210 Closing plugin 'plugin1'
    - 000212 Closing plugin 'plugin2'
    - 000212 Goodbye!

To see more or less logging output, use the `--verbose` or `--quiet` options,
respectively.  To process a MIDI file through an instrument, you'd do
something like this:

    mrswatson --midi-file mysong.mid --output out.pcm --plugin piano:soft.fxp

Like the first example, a comma-separated list of plugins can be given here so
that the audio generated by the instrument can be processed through any number
of effects. Each plugin name can be followed by a colon and the location to a
preset file to be loaded before processing.

Complete help for MrsWatson can be found by running the program with no
arguments, or with `--help`.

Loading Plugins
---------------

Currently, MrsWatson loads plugins by their short name by searching in the
standard installation locations for your platform. It does not (yet) allow for
specifying a plugin by absolute path.

While MrsWatson has some understanding of getting and setting plugin
parameters, it does not extend this functionality to the end user. Rather than
passing a huge list of comma/colon separated parameters/values on the command
line, users should instead create a preset for the plugin and load it with the
colon-separated syntax as shown above.

Limitations
-----------

As MrsWatson is a new codebase, there are lots of missing features, some more
important than others. To encourage a quick initial release, the following
features are not yet present in MrsWatson, but may be added at some point in
the future:

  * AudioUnit plugins on Mac OSX
  * File support for WAV/AIFF/MP3/OGG
  * Resampling of input source if desired
  * True realtime mode

I have also tried to identify incomplete areas of the code and log them to the
console, which means that we are aware that this feature is missing and will
be added soon. If you see some other missing functionality or experience a
crash or other bug, please report an issue on our [project page][3].

Please Help!
------------

As mentioned, MrsWatson is fully functional but needs a lot of polish. If you
find areas of the code which are incomplete or not compatible with some
plugins, please make a pull request.

Likewise, if you want to help out without programming, the best way to do so
is to test and report any problems with given plugins or platforms.

Donate
------

If you are using MrsWatson to do something cool, please send me a link to your
project! If you appreciate MrsWatson and would like to donate money, please
instead make a donation to a charity on our behalf, and let us know about it.
The organizations which have helped us the most are:

  * [EFF](https://supporters.eff.org/donate): Without the EFF, programs like
    MrsWatson would be significantly harder to create and distribute.
  * [Wikipedia](http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/WMFJA085/en): Writing
    MrsWatson involves a lot of research as well as coding, and Wikipedia is
    an essential part of this.

Licensing
---------

MrsWatson is made available under the BSD license. For more details, see the
`LICENSE` file distributed with the source code. MrsWatson also uses the
following third-party libraries, which are licensed under the respective
agreements:

  * [VST](http://www.steinberg.net/en/company/developer.html): Licensed under
    Steinberg's VST SDK license agreement, version 2.4. For more information,
    see Steinberg's developer portal.
  * [LibAiff](http://aifftools.sourceforge.net/libaiff/): Written by Marco
    Trillo, made under the BSD license. For more details, see the LICENSE file
    in the LibAiff source code.


[1]: http://www.teragonaudio.com
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dr._Watson_(debugger)
[3]: http://github.com/teragonaudio/MrsWatson
